CHAPTER 4: Birth through Twelve Months
================================================================================

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
13
CHAPTER 4: BIRTH  
THROUGH TWELVE MONTHS
During a baby’s first year, remarkable changes occur in the five developmental domains: 
physical and motor, social and emotional, communication and language, cognitive, and 
approaches to learning. The developmental milestones in each of these domains are often 
referred to as developmental indicators and can be identified easily during your observa-
tions. Typically all babies achieve these common milestones, but they may do so at different 
rates. Even so, by the end of each stage of development, most babies will have reached the 
same developmental milestones. Keep in mind that the ages given are approximations, and 
infants may vary in their individual development and acquisition of skills.
Learning, practicing, and mastery are the three categories included in the Observational 
Record. The record provides three opportunities for infants to achieve mastery, though only 
one observation may be needed. As you observe, record a date and, if possible, a comment 
once you discover a milestone being attempted, repeated, or accomplished. And enjoy 
watching the babies!
Physical and Motor Development
Birth to Two Months
Exhibits a rooting reflex
Infants turn their heads (as if a bottle or breast is available) when their cheeks are stroked.
Reacts to loud noises
Infants appear startled or become quiet when they hear loud noises.
Holds head up
By the end of their first month, infants can briefly raise their heads from the shoulder of the 
person holding them or from a flat surface, such as a crib or the floor.
Makes quick and jerking arm movements
Infants don’t have a completely developed nervous system at this time and continue to act 
using their reflexes.
Brings hands to face
Infants find their faces and may suck their thumbs or put their hands in their mouths for a 
sensory experience.

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
14
Moves head from side to side while on stomach
Infants appear to survey their environment while looking from side to side; this movement 
is often accompanied by grunting sounds.
Focuses on objects eight to twelve inches away
It has been said that the distance from a mother’s arms to her face while nursing is about 
the same distance that an infant can gaze or focus. Most parents and caregivers also hold 
babies in front of them at about this same distance.
Two to Three Months
Turns head easily to both sides in supine (lying on back) position
While infants’ neck muscles continue to strengthen, they turn their heads frequently.
Lifts head off surface from prone (face down) position for one to two seconds
Infants often practice this exercise for very short periods of time before they become fussy 
or tired. This is another method of building strength.
Follows moving object with eyes
This is sometimes referred to as tracking; infants enjoy watching an object move back and 
forth slowly. They usually like to watch faces more than objects. Infants may turn away once 
a face or object has become too familiar because of repeated exposure.
Responds to loud sounds
Infants may respond with startled motions or crying when exposed to loud sounds, such as 
vacuum cleaners, honking horns, or alarm clocks.
Grasps and holds objects briefly
Do not confused this with the grasping reflex. Infants seek toys and grasp them briefly 
before letting go.
Three to Four Months
Brings hands to midline while on back
Infants bring their hands to their midline when they explore and discover that they can 
control their hands.
Rotates or turns head from side to side with no head bobbing
Infants progress at this stage from head bobbing to more steady movements with no 
bobbing. While being held in an upright position, they may turn their heads from side to side 
while they explore the environment or hear sounds that interest them.
Holds head steady when carried or held
When infants are being held upright, they can hold their heads erect and steady. 

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
15
Plays with hands and may hold and observe a toy
Infants can locate and play with their hands, often using them to grab and hold toys or 
nearby objects for a short time. 
Reaches for objects
Infants’ hand-eye coordination starts to develop. They notice toys that they want to hold 
and attempt to pick them up.
Pushes down on legs when feet are placed on a firm surface
Around four months of age, when infants are held in a standing position with their feet on a 
firm or hard surface, they appear to propel themselves to jump.
Exhibits the rooting reflex less often or not at all
As you stroke their cheeks, infants do not respond by turning their heads but by smiling or 
gazing at you.
Four to Six Months
Follows distant object with eyes
Infants’ eyes work together and focus equally on objects; they can track objects’ movement 
from a greater distance. 
Lifts head while in supine (lying on back) position
Infants have developed strong neck muscles.
Holds chest up with weight on forearms
Infants are stronger in the upper chest area and can now support their weight with their 
forearms.
Rolls from stomach to side
This is infants’ early attempt at rolling all the way over. 
Rolls from stomach to back
This movement usually follows soon after infants learn to roll from their tummies to their 
sides.
Rolls from back to stomach
This movement usually follows infants learning to roll from their stomachs to their backs.
Stands with support
Infants can stand briefly if you hold them up. This exercise increases leg strength.
Brings feet to mouth easily while in supine (lying on back) position
Infants strengthen their upper body movements when they reach for, grab, and pull their 
feet forward to their faces. Doing this also helps them achieve a perception of self.

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
16
Six to Nine Months
Transfers object from one hand to another
After taking a toy, babies can move the toy back and forth at will.
Uses toes and hands to propel forward or in a circle
Babies dig in their toes and hands to move.
Attempts to crawl (stomach and legs dragging)
With their stomachs touching the floor and heads and shoulders supported by the weight 
borne by their elbows, infants pull along their bodies while their legs drag behind, as they 
do in swimming or kicking. 
Crawls
Babies move on their hands and knees from one place to another at will.
Gets to a sitting position
Babies can pull themselves up into a sitting position independently.
Grasps small items
Babies use their whole hands, and they pick up small toys or objects with their thumbs and 
fingers.
Sits without support
Babies can sit unsupported in a high chair for feeding or on a solid, flat surface to play.
Can be pulled to feet but can’t support self
Babies can support their body weight and stand on their feet with external support (adult 
hands, furniture, and so forth).
Nine to Twelve Months
May stand momentarily without support
In preparation for walking, babies continue to gain strength in their legs and lower body by 
standing often. Usually babies stand by holding onto something solid, such as a chair, low 
table, or sofa, and then let go of the object to take their first steps.
Walks with assistance
Babies delight in pretend walking, or prewalking, by holding onto adults’ hands or 
surrounding furniture. They may walk briefly (two or three steps) without assistance.
Walks alone 
Babies can walk unsupported on flat surfaces.

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
17
Social and Emotional Development
Birth to One Month
Makes demanding cries
Infants use loud, demanding cries to communicate with us. They may be hungry, wet, 
uncomfortable, or sick.
Shows sense of trust
Infants’ sense of trust shows that they are nurtured and cared for in positive ways. Their 
demands and needs are met consistently and readily. Infants often show less tension and 
more stability when they can trust the adults around them.
Shows attachment (responds positively) to significant adults
Securely attached infants readily respond to tenderness and compassion from their 
caregivers.
Makes eye contact
Babies make eye contact for several seconds with their caregivers.
One to Three Months
Coos
Infants communicate by cooing or making gurgling or grunting sounds. Language and 
speech development occur when they attempt to socialize.
Smiles at the sound of familiar voices
Infants are born knowing the sounds of voices they have heard repeatedly while in utero. 
Many parents read to their unborn babies, and there is evidence that babies recognize their 
voices.
Tracks moving persons or objects
Infants have a developing curiosity and are attracted by movement. Their visual acuity 
develops during this activity.
Cries to demand attention
Infants continue to develop a sense of trust in others and use crying to get caregivers to 
meet their needs.
Smiles at strangers
Infants do not fear strangers at this age and often smile at unfamiliar faces.

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
18
Three to Six Months
Babbles and laughs to get adult attention
This vocal activity becomes more intentional at this age; infants seek interactions with 
important adults and other children.
Responds to smiles with smiling
Imitation of a smiling adult or sibling is common. Infants appear to smile when someone 
smiles at them.
Pays close attention to older children and their actions
Infants watch older siblings, especially older toddlers, and respond with occasional smiles.
Calms self
Infants can sometimes regulate their own distress by placing their fingers in their mouths 
or by focusing on something else, such as toys, clothing, or mobiles.
Looks and listens for purpose
Infants begin to understand that words and actions have meaning and look and listen 
attentively. 
Six to Nine Months
Distinguishes voices of important, familiar people
Babies turn toward familiar voices and give them more attention by staring and moving 
their bodies in anticipation of communication.
Can distinguish voice tones and emotions
Babies can often tell when others are sad, happy, or angry by tone of voice. Caregivers can 
easily observe the way infants react to these emotions in adults.
Plays games with adults and older children
Games such as peekaboo and pat-a-cake are common, and babies appear to enjoy the 
element of surprise, as well as the close interaction with family members and caregivers.
Nine to Twelve Months
Begins to feel anxiety on separation from familiar adults (separation anxiety)
Babies start to cry or fuss when family members or caregivers leave their sight. They 
appear to notice the absence of significant persons.
Begins to feel anxiety in the presence of strangers (stranger anxiety)
When babies see unfamiliar people, they may begin to cry, cling to caregivers, or hide their 
faces.

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
19
Plays with others
Babies initiate social play, accompanied by laughter and high-pitched squeals.
Expresses emotions (happiness, sadness, anger, and surprise) through gestures, 
sounds, or facial expressions
Babies may display anger when they are denied goals or their goals are disrupted. At this 
age, anger has more purpose and is usually directed at something or someone in particular. 
Outbursts of slapping, kicking, knocking away, and stomping may accompany bouts of 
anger.
Explores environment
Once infants become mobile, they begin to use all of their senses to explore the environ-
ment around them.
Communication and Language Development
One to Two Months
Coos in response to adults’ speech
Infants prefer human speech to other sounds. They respond by cooing to positive speech 
from adults.
Two to Four Months
Makes squealing and gurgling sounds
Infants learn to express themselves through vocalizations. Pretalking sounds, such as 
squealing and gurgling, also provide emotional outlets.
Four to Six Months
Babbles consonant sounds such as “ba-ba-ba-ba-ba” and “da-da-da-da-da”
Although many parents claim their children say “ma-ma” or “da-da” at this age, infants do 
not associate sounds with people at this stage of development.
Laughs out loud
Infants commonly laugh in response to tickles, smiles, gentle bouncing on adults’ knees, 
and so on.
Six to Nine Months
Babbles sounds, such as “goo” and “gaa”
These sounds are a combination of vowels and consonants and are considered to be impor-
tant prespeech behavior.

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
20
Experiments with vocalizations that include longer and more varied sounds
Babies yell or make loud, extended sounds when tired and “ahhhhhhhhh” or “ehhhhhhhhh” 
sounds when happy.
Uses intonations in sounds
Babies imitate the rise and fall of adult speech in their vocalizations.
Responds to own name
Babies turn their faces toward adults or children who speak the babies’ names.
Develops receptive-language vocabulary
Babies understand simple words, commands, and phrases long before they can talk. They 
understand more words every day. Their receptive-language understanding is much larger 
than their expressive ability.
Nine to Twelve Months
Says at least one word
Babies make particular sounds associated with distinctive actions or objects, such as a 
cracker, cookie, blankie, or shoe. Adults may not understand the sounds, but the babies are 
likely to repeat them when they see those objects.
Gestures or points to communicate
Although babies don’t talk, they may indicate their needs by reaching for objects. They may 
indicate they want to be held by reaching up to their caregivers.
Listens to songs, stories, or rhymes with interest
Babies enjoy being read to and pay attention to played or sung music.
Imitates sounds
At this time, most babies can say “Uh-oh!” in imitation of their family members or 
caregivers.
Cognitive Development
Birth to Two Months
Shows understanding that crying brings comfort
Infants whose cries are responded to in a timely manner appear to show a sense of trust 
that crying gets their needs met.
Prefers black-and-white or high-contrast patterns
Although this lasts for only about the first three months, most infants show a definite pref-
erence for these visual patterns.

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
21
Two to Four Months
Explores the environment with senses
Infants look, gaze, mouth, and turn their heads to sounds and textures in the environment.
Discovers hands and feet are extensions of self
Infants stare at their hands and intentionally grab or hold their feet.
Responds to own reflection in mirror
Infants are drawn to their own reflections. They make eye contact and may reach out to 
touch their reflections.
Anticipates events
Infants begin to recognize that a meal, a bath, or bedtime is about to happen.
Four to Six Months
Shows interest in manipulating toys and objects
Infants become more intentional in making their own selections during this period. They 
also grasp and hold onto objects for longer periods of time.
Six to Nine Months
Investigates objects by banging, shaking, and throwing
Babies explore cause and effect when they manipulate objects for a desired outcome or 
result.
Shows interest in objects with moving parts
Babies poke, prod, rattle, and bang toys with moving parts. They also like to watch moving 
mobiles and other hanging objects that gently sway when moved.
Shows interest in playing games
At about eight months, babies can initiate games that are familiar to them rather than wait 
for a caregiver or sibling to initiate them.
Nine to Twelve Months
Responds to “no”
Babies can shake their heads “no” in response to questions or commands from adults and 
may begin saying “no” soon afterward.
Waves bye-bye
With prompting, babies usually can wave at this age, but they sometimes wave without 
prompts.

--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
22
Shows understanding of object permanence (that is, knows objects exist when out of 
sight)
Hide a toy underneath a blanket or behind a box, and babies search for it.
Engages in more intentional play
Babies may run a train along a track or place a ball in a basket.
Intentionally selects toys to play with
It is not uncommon for babies to crawl toward desired toys, persons, or objects.
Shows understanding that objects have purpose
Babies begin to purposefully or imitatively use objects, such as hairbrushes, telephones, 
and spoons.
Approaches to Learning
Birth to Six Months
Shows curiosity by exploring with senses
Infants have a developing curiosity and use all of their senses to explore the environment 
around them.
Six to Twelve Months
Shows persistence by repeating actions
When infants’ actions create an effect, such as the sound made by banging on a drum, they 
begin to show persistence by repeating their actions again and again.
Explores the environment actively, regardless of obstacles
Infants love to explore using their whole bodies. Babies six to twelve months can overcome 
obstacles and emerge successful.
Intentionally looks for and reaches for objects of interest
Infants choose and reach for desired toys, objects, or persons.

--- PDF PAGE 32 ---
23
CHAPTER 5: ONE-YEAR-OLDS
Between twelve and twenty-four months, young children are full of energy and seem to get 
into everything! Balancing on their feet and eventually walking are marked achievements 
at this stage of development. Beginning communication skills emerge as children become 
more adept at using language and start to develop a vocabulary. One-year-olds constantly 
seek interactions with other people (peers and caregivers), and as they approach twenty-
four months, they develop a sense of self. While the following developmental milestones 
are common to all children ages twelve to twenty-four months, remember that children 
develop at different rates.
Physical and Motor Development
Twelve to Eighteen Months
Enjoys clapping hands
At age one, children can clap their hands in excitement or to mimic adults.
Walks with assistance
Most children walk during this stage without assistance, but some still cling to adults or to 
furniture when they venture out.
Begins to use a spoon
Young toddlers begin to grab spoons from their caregivers, as if to feed themselves, and 
eventually can move the spoon to and from their mouths.
Walks without assistance
One-year-olds can walk independently without the help of adults.
Crawls up and down stairs
Toward the end of this stage, twelve- to eighteen-month-olds can navigate stairs by 
crawling but need adults close by.
Stacks two objects
At age one, children can stack two objects, one on top of the other, using their new fine-
motor skills.
Pulls off socks and shoes
By the end of their first year, young toddlers can take off socks and shoes but cannot put 
them back on. They can remove other things, such as their diapers, toys stacked on rings, 
and objects in a cabinet.
